<!DOCTYPE composition PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" 
                      "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<ui:composition xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
	xmlns:s="http://jboss.com/products/seam/taglib"
	xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
	xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
	xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
	xmlns:a4j="http://richfaces.org/a4j"
	xmlns:rich="http://richfaces.org/rich">

	<table>
		<tr>
			<td>
				<h:graphicImage value="/img/seamlogo.png" alt="Seam logo"/>
			</td>
			<td>
				
				<rich:panel style="border-radius:20px">
				<!--  
			      <f:facet name="header" style="border-radius:12px">Database As A Service (DaaS)</f:facet> 
			      -->
			      <p>
			       VIDaaS (Virtual Infrastructure with Database as a Service) is a project of two halves. The 'DaaS' part will develop software that enables 
			       researchers to build, edit, search, and share databases online; the 'VI' part involves the development of an infrastructure enabling 
			       the DaaS to function within a cloud computing environment.
				   </p>
				   <p>
				    In computing terms, a 'cloud' is a network of computing resources that provides both space to store data and the computational power to 
				    do things with it, all done remotely from the user's own machine. Cloud technology has the potential to save organisations a considerable 
				    amount of money, partly through the economies of scale that come from providing resources centrally, and partly through flexibility, as 
				    the organisation does not need to invest in more computing storage or power than it actually needs at any given time.
			      </p>
			      <p>
			      VIDaaS is funded under the JISC's UMF Shared Services and the Cloud programme. It follows on from the Sudamih Project. 
			      VIDaaS is based at the University of Oxford and will be working with researchers from the University in the first instance. 
			      It began in April 2011 and runs until March 2012.
			      </p>
     			</rich:panel>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</table>
</ui:composition>